Protein-Protein Interaction Graphs
==================================

.. highlight:: r

More about R
------------

In previous practicals you have have used the R statistics software
for analysing many different types of data. In this practical, you
will use R for analysing protein-protein interaction data. However,
first we will discuss some features of R that will be useful in
this practical.

One thing that is useful to know about R is that many R packages 
come with example data sets, which can be used to familiarise
yourself with the functions in the particular package. To list the
data sets that come with a particular package, you can use the
data() function in R. For example, to find the data sets that come
with the "graph" package, type:

::

    > library("graph")
    > data(package="graph")
    Data sets in package 'graph':
    
    IMCAAttrs (integrinMediatedCellAdhesion)
                                   KEGG Integrin Mediated Cell Adhesion graph
    IMCAGraph (integrinMediatedCellAdhesion)
                                   KEGG Integrin Mediated Cell Adhesion graph
    MAPKsig                        A graph encoding parts of the MAPK signaling pathway
    MAPKsig (defunctGraph)         A graph encoding parts of the MAPK signaling pathway
    apopGraph                      KEGG apoptosis pathway graph
    biocRepos                      A graph representing the Bioconductor package repository
    graphExamples                  A List Of Example Graphs
    pancrCaIni                     A graph encoding parts of the pancreatic cancer initiation

You can then load any of these data sets into R by typing, for
example, to load the apopGraph data set:

::

    > data("apopGraph")

In this practical, you will also be using the table() function to
make tables of data stored in vectors. If you have a vector
containing numeric values, the table() function is useful for
making a table saying how many elements in the vector have each of
the values. For example:

::

    > y <- c(10, 10, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 30) # Make a numeric vector "y"
    > table(y)
    y
    10 20 30 
     2  5  1 

The results from the table() function tell us that two of the
elements in vector *y* have values of 10, five elements have values
of 20, and one element has a value of thirty.

Another use of the table() function is to tell us how many elements
in a vector of numbers have a particular numeric value. For
example, if we want to know how many elements in vector *y* have a
value of 20, we can type:

::

    > table(y == 20)
    FALSE  TRUE 
        3     5 

This tells us that five elements of vector *y* have values of 20.

In this practical you will be using functions from several
different packages. It's important to remember that sometimes
functions in different packages have the same name. For example,
there is a function called degree() in both the "igraph" and
"graph" packages. Therefore, you need to specify which degree()
function you want to use, by putting the package name, followed by
":", before the name of the function. For example, to use the
degree() function from the "graph" package, you can type
graph::degree(), while to use the degree() function from the
"igraph" package, you can type igraph::degree().

Graphs for protein-protein interaction data in R
------------------------------------------------

Protein-protein interaction data can be described in terms of
graphs. In this practical, we will explore a curated data set of
protein-protein interactions, by using R packages for analysing
and visualising graphs.

We will use three main R packages that have been written for
handling biological graphs: the "graph" package, the "RBGL"
package, and the "Rgraphviz" package. The Rgraphviz package is part
of the Bioconductor set of R packages, so needs to be installed as
part of that set of package (see the Bioconductor webpage at
`www.bioconductor.org/docs/install/ <http://www.bioconductor.org/docs/install/>`_
for details).

We will first analyse a curated data set of protein-protein
interactions in the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* extracted from
published papers. This data set comes from with an R package called
"yeastExpData", which calls the data set "litG". This data was
first described in a paper by Ge *et al* (2001) in
*Nature Genetics*
(`http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v29/n4/full/ng776.html <http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v29/n4/full/ng776.html>`_).

To read the litG data set into R, we first need to load the
yeastExpData package, and then we can use the R data() function to
read in the litG data set:

::

    > library("yeastExpData") # Load the yeastExpData package
    > data("litG")            # Read the litG data set 

When you read in the litG data set using the data() function, it is
stored as a graph in R. In this graph, the vertices (nodes) are
proteins, and edges between vertices indicate that two proteins
interact. There are 2885 different vertices in the graph,
representing 2885 different proteins.

You can print out the number of vertices and edges in a graph in R
by just typing the name of the graph, for example:

::

    > litG
    A graphNEL graph with undirected edges
    Number of Nodes = 2885 
    Number of Edges = 315 

This tells us that the litG graph has 2885 vertices, and 315 edges.
The 315 edges in the graph represent 315 protein-protein
interactions between 315 pairs of proteins.

Finding the names of vertices in graphs for protein-protein interaction data in R
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The "graph" R package contains many functions for analysing graph
data in R. For example, the nodes() function from the graph package 
can be used to retrieve the names of the vertices (nodes) in the
graph. For example, we can retrive the names of the vertices in the
litG graph, and store them in a vector "mynodes", by typing:

::

    > library("graph")        # Load the graph package 
    > mynodes <- nodes(litG)  # Retrieve the names of the vertices in the litG graph

We can then print the names of the first 10 vertices in the litG
graph, by typing:

::

    > mynodes[1:10]           # Print the names of the first 10 vertices in the litG graph
     [1] "YBL072C" "YBL083C" "YBR009C" "YBR010W" "YBR031W" "YBR093C" "YBR106W"
     [8] "YBR118W" "YBR188C" "YBR191W"

This gives the names of the yeast proteins corresponding to the
first 10 vertices in the litG graph. Note that the order that the
proteins are stored in the graph does not have any meaning; these
10 proteins just happen to be the first 10 stored in the litG
graph. As *mynodes* is a vector that contains one element for each
vertex in the litG graph, the number of elements *mynodes* should
be equal to the number of vertices in the litG graph:

::

    > length(mynodes)         # Find the number of vertices in the litG graph
    [1] 2885

As expected, we find that the litG graph contains 2885 vertices,
which represent 2885 different yeast proteins.

Finding the names of proteins that a particular protein interacts with
----------------------------------------------------------------------

If you are particularly interested in a particular protein in a
protein-protein interaction graph, you may want to print out the
list of the proteins that that protein interacts with. To do this,
you can use the adj() function in the R "graph" package. For
example, to print out the proteins that yeast protein YBR009C
interacts with in the litG graph, you can type:

::

    > adj(litG, "YBR009C")
    $YBR009C
    [1] "YBR010W" "YNL031C" "YDR227W"

This tells us that protein YBR009C interacts with three other
protein in the litG graph, that is, YBR010W, YNL031C and YDR227W.

Calculating the degree distribution for a graph in R
----------------------------------------------------

The *degree* of a vertex (node) in a graph is the number of
connections that it has to other vertices in the graph.

The *degree distribution* for a graph is the distribution of degree
values for all the vertices in the graph, that is, the number of
vertices in the graph that have degrees of 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.

In terms of a protein-protein interaction graph, each vertex in the
graph represents a protein, and the degree of a particular vertex
is the number of interactions that that protein has with other
proteins.

You can calculate the degrees of all the vertices in a graph by
using the degree() function in the R "graph" package. The degree()
function returns a vector containing the degrees of each of the
vertices in the graph. Remember that there is a degree() function
in both the "graph" and "igraph" packages, so if you have loaded
both packages, you will need to specify that you want to use the
degree() function in the "graph" package, by writing
graph::degree().

For example, to calculate the degrees of vertices in the litG
graph, we type:

::

    > mydegrees <- graph::degree(litG)
    > mydegrees # Print out the values in the vector "mydegrees"
      YBL072C   YBL083C   YBR009C   YBR010W   YBR031W   YBR093C   YBR106W   YBR118W 
            0         0         3         3         0         0         0         2 

For example, we see from the above results that the yeast protein
YBL072C does not interact with any other protein, while the yeast
protein YBR118W interacts with two other yeast proteins. Only the
first line of the results is shown, as there are 2885 vertices in
the litG graph.

You can sort the vector *mydegrees* in order of the number of
degrees, by using the sort() function:

::

    > sort(mydegrees)
      YBL072C   YBL083C   YBR031W   YBR093C   YBR106W   YBR188C   YBR191W   YBR206W   YCL007C   YCL018W 
            0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0 
    ...
      YBR198C   YDR392W   YDR448W   YBR160W   YFL039C 
            8         8         9        10        12 

Only the first and last lines of the output are shown above. You
can see from the last line of the output that there are some
vertices that have high degrees. For example, the vertex
corresponding to the protein YFL039C is 12. This means that the
protein YFL039C interacts with 12 other proteins. Such highly
connected proteins in a protein-protein interaction graph are
sometimes called *hub proteins*.

We can calculate the *degree distribution* for a graph by using the
table() function to make a table of how many vertices in the graph
have degrees of 0, 1, 2, 3, etc. For example, to calculate the
degree distribution for the litG graph, you can type:

::

    > table(mydegrees)
    mydegrees
       0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10   12 
    2587  159   58   38   19    7    3    7    4    1    1    1 

This tells us that 2587 vertices in the litG graph are not
connected to any other vertices, 159 vertices are connected to one
other vertex, 58 vertices are connected to two other vertices, and
so on. You can calculate the mean degree of the vertices using the
mean() function in R:

::

    > mean(mydegrees)
    [1] 0.2183709

The mean degree is only about 0.22 for the litG graph, as most of
the proteins do not interact with any other protein.

It is nice to visualise the degree distribution for a graph by
plotting it as a histogram (using the hist() R function):

::

    > hist(mydegrees, col="red")

|image0|

Finding connected components in graphs for protein-protein interaction data in R
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you are analysing a very large graph, it may contain several
subgraphs, where the vertices within each subgraph are connected to
each other by edges, but there are no edges connecting the vertices
in different subgraphs. In this case, the subgraphs are known as
*connected components* (also called
*maximally connected subgraphs*).

For example, the graph below contains three connected components:

|image1|

Image source:
`http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connected\_component\_(graph\_theory) <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connected_component_(graph_theory)>`_

You can find connected components of a graph in R, by using the
connectedComp function in the "RBGL" package. For example, to find
connected components in the litG graph, we type:

::

    > library("RBGL")
    > myconnectedcomponents <- connectedComp(litG) 

The commands above store the connected components in the litG graph
in a list *myconnectedcomponents*. Each connected component is
stored in one element of the list variable *myconnectedcomponents*.
That is, each element of the list *myconnectedcomponents* is a
vector containing the names of the proteins in a particular
connected component.

We can print out the yeast proteins that are the vertices of the
first three connected components by printing out the first three
elements in the list *myconnectedcomponents*. Remember that you
need to use double square brackets to access the elements of a list
variable in R:

::

    > myconnectedcomponents[[1]]
    [1] "YBL072C"
    > myconnectedcomponents[[2]]
    [1] "YBL083C"
    > myconnectedcomponents[[3]]
     [1] "YBR009C" "YBR010W" "YNL030W" "YNL031C" "YOL139C" "YAR007C" "YBR073W"
     [8] "YER095W" "YJL173C" "YNL312W" "YBL084C" "YDR146C" "YLR127C" "YNL172W"
    [15] "YLR134W" "YMR284W" "YER179W" "YIL144W" "YML104C" "YOR191W" "YDL008W"
    [22] "YDL030W" "YDL042C" "YDR004W" "YGR162W" "YMR117C" "YDR386W" "YDR485C"
    [29] "YDL043C" "YDR118W" "YMR106C" "YML032C" "YDR076W" "YDR180W" "YDL013W"
    [36] "YDR227W"

That is, the first two connected components only contain one
protein each. These two proteins must not have interactions with
any of the other yeast proteins in the litG graph. The third
connected component contains 36 proteins. These 36 proteins are not
necessarily all connected to each other, but each of the 36
proteins must be connected to at least one of the other 35 proteins
in the connected component. Note that the connected components are
not stored in the list *myconnectedcomponents* in any particular
order; these just happen to be the first three connected components
stored in the list.

To find the total number of connected components in the litG graph,
we can just find the length of the list *myconnectedcomponents*:

::

    > length(myconnectedcomponents)
    [1] 2642

That is, there are 2642 different connected components in the litG
graph. These are 2642 subgraphs of the graph, where there are edges
between the vertices within a subgraph, but no edges between the
2642 subgraphs.

It is interesting to know what is the largest connected component
in a graph. How can we calculate this for the litG graph? Well,
each element of the litG graph contains a vector storing the
proteins in a particular connected component, and the length of
this vector is the number of proteins in that connected component.
Thus, to calculate the sizes of all connected components in the
litG graph, we can use a "for loop" to calculate the length of each
of the vectors in *myconnectedcomponents* in turn:

::

    > componentsizes <- numeric(2642) # Make a vector for storing the sizes of the 2642 connected components
    > for (i in 1:2642) {
       component <- myconnectedcomponents[[i]] # Store the connected component in a vector "component"
       componentsize <- length(component)      # Find the number of vertices in this connected component
       componentsizes[i] <- componentsize      # Store the size of this component
    }

In the code above, the line componentsizes <- numeric(2642) makes a
new vector *componentsizes* which has the same number of elements
as the number of connected components in the litG graph (2642).
This vector *componentsizes* is then used within the for loop for
storing the size of each connected component. We can now find the
size of the largest connected component in the litG graph by using
the max() R function to find the largest value in the vector
*componentsizes*:

::

    > max(componentsizes)
    [1] 88

That is, the largest connected component in the litG graph has 88
different proteins.

We can also use the table() function in R to make a table of the
number of connected components of different sizes:

::

    > table(componentsizes)
    componentsizes
       1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8   12   13   36   88 
    2587   29   10    7    1    1    2    1    1    1    1    1 

This tells us that there is just one connected component with 88
proteins. Furthermore, we see that there are 2587 connected
components that contain just 1 protein each. These proteins
presumably do not have any known interactions with with any other
protein in the litG data set.

To find the connected component that a particular protein belongs to,
you can use the findcomponent function:

::

    > findcomponent <- function(graph,vertex)
      {
         # Function to find the connected component that contains a particular vertex
         require("RBGL")
         found <- 0
         myconnectedcomponents <- connectedComp(graph)
         numconnectedcomponents <- length(myconnectedcomponents)
         for (i in 1:numconnectedcomponents)
         {
            componenti <- myconnectedcomponents[[i]] 
            numvertices <- length(componenti)
            for (j in 1:numvertices)
            {
               vertexj <- componenti[j]
               if (vertexj == vertex) 
               {
                  found <- 1
                  return(componenti)
               }   
            }
         }
         print("ERROR: did not find vertex in the graph")
      }  

The function findcompontent() returns a vector containing the names
of the proteins in the connected component. For example, to find
the connected component containing the protein YBR009C, you can
type:

::

    > mycomponent <- findcomponent(litG, "YBR009C")
    > mycomponent # Print out the members of this connected component. 
       [1] "YBR009C" "YBR010W" "YNL030W" "YNL031C" "YOL139C" "YAR007C" "YBR073W" "YER095W" "YJL173C" "YNL312W"
      [11] "YBL084C" "YDR146C" "YLR127C" "YNL172W" "YLR134W" "YMR284W" "YER179W" "YIL144W" "YML104C" "YOR191W"
      [21] "YDL008W" "YDL030W" "YDL042C" "YDR004W" "YGR162W" "YMR117C" "YDR386W" "YDR485C" "YDL043C" "YDR118W"
      [31] "YMR106C" "YML032C" "YDR076W" "YDR180W" "YDL013W" "YDR227W"

Extracting a subgraph from a graph in R
---------------------------------------

If you want to extract a particular subgraph of a graph (that is,
part of a graph), you can use the subGraph function in the "graph"
package. As its arguments (inputs), the subGraph function contains
a vector containing the vertices (nodes) in the subgraph that we're
interested in, and the graph that the subgraph belongs to.

For example, if we want to extract the subgraph (of graph litG)
that contains the third connected component in the vector
*myconnectedcomponents*, we type:

::

    > myconnectedcomponents <- connectedComp(litG)
    > component3 <- myconnectedcomponents[[3]]
    > component3 # Print out the proteins in connected component 3 
     [1] "YBR009C" "YBR010W" "YNL030W" "YNL031C" "YOL139C" "YAR007C" "YBR073W"
     [8] "YER095W" "YJL173C" "YNL312W" "YBL084C" "YDR146C" "YLR127C" "YNL172W"
    [15] "YLR134W" "YMR284W" "YER179W" "YIL144W" "YML104C" "YOR191W" "YDL008W"
    [22] "YDL030W" "YDL042C" "YDR004W" "YGR162W" "YMR117C" "YDR386W" "YDR485C"
    [29] "YDL043C" "YDR118W" "YMR106C" "YML032C" "YDR076W" "YDR180W" "YDL013W"
    [36] "YDR227W"
    > mysubgraph <- subGraph(component3, litG)
    > mysubgraph
    A graphNEL graph with undirected edges
    Number of Nodes = 36 
    Number of Edges = 48 

The commands above store the subgraph corresponding to *component3*
in a graph object *mysubgraph* that contains 36 vertices and 48
edges.

Plotting graphs for protein-protein interaction data in R
---------------------------------------------------------

The "Rgraphviz" R package contains useful functions for plotting
graphs, or plotting parts of graphs ("subgraphs").

The layoutGraph and renderGraph functions in the Rgraphviz package
can be used to make a nice plot of a subgraph. There are lots of
options for the colours to use for plotting vertices and edges.

For example, if we want to make a plot of the subgraph
corresponding to the third connected component in the vector
*myconnectedcomponents*, we can type:

::

    > library("Rgraphviz")
    > mysubgraph <- subGraph(component3, litG)
    > mygraphplot <- layoutGraph(mysubgraph, layoutType="neato")
    > renderGraph(mygraphplot)

|image2|

The plot above shows a plot of the third connected component in the
graph litG. There are 36 vertices in this subgraph, corresponding
to 36 different yeast proteins. The names of the proteins are shown
in the circles that represent the vertices. The edges between
vertices represent interactions between pairs of proteins.

Detecting communities in a protein-protein interaction graph using R
--------------------------------------------------------------------

A property common to many types of graphs, including
protein-protein interaction graphs, is *community structure*. A
*community* is often defined as a subset of the vertices in the
graph such that connections btween the vertices are denser than
connections with the rest of the graph. For example, the graph in
the picture below consists of one connected component. However,
within that connected component, we can see three densely connected
subgraphs; these could be said to be three different *communities*
within the graph:

|image3|

Image source:
`http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community\_structure <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_structure>`_

In terms of protein-protein interaction networks, if there are
several communities within a connected component (for example,
three communities, as in the picture above), these could represent
three different groups of proteins, where the proteins within one
community interact much more with each other than with proteins in
the other communities.

By detecting communities within a protein-protein interaction
graph, we can detect putative *protein complexes*, that is, groups
of associated proteins that are probably fairly stable over time.
In other words, protein complexes can be detected by looking for
groups of proteins among which there are many interactions, and
where the members of the complex have few interactions with other
proteins that do not belong to the complex.

There are lots of different methods available for detecting
communities in a graph, and each method will give slightly
different results. That is, the particular method used for
detecting communities will decide how you split a connected
component into one or more communities.

The function findcommunities() below identifies communities within
a graph (or subgraph of a graph). It requires a second function,
findcommunities2(), which is also below:

::

    > findcommunities <- function(mygraph,minsize)
      {
         # Function to find network communities in a graph
         # Load up the igraph library:
         require("igraph")
         # Set the counter for the number of communities:
         cnt <- 0
         # First find the connected components in the graph:
         myconnectedcomponents <- connectedComp(mygraph)
         # For each connected component, find the communities within that connected component:
         numconnectedcomponents <- length(myconnectedcomponents)
         for (i in 1:numconnectedcomponents)
         {
            component <- myconnectedcomponents[[i]]
            # Find the number of nodes in this connected component:
            numnodes <- length(component)
            if (numnodes > 1) # We can only find communities if there is more than one node
            {
               mysubgraph <- subGraph(component, mygraph)
               # Find the communities within this connected component:
               # print(component)
               myvector <- vector()
               mylist <- findcommunities2(mysubgraph,cnt,"FALSE",myvector,minsize)
               cnt <- mylist[[1]]
               myvector <- mylist[[2]]
            }
         }
         print(paste("There were",cnt,"communities in the input graph"))
      }  
    > findcommunities2 <- function(mygraph,cnt,plot,myvector,minsize)
      {
         # Function to find network communities in a connected component of a graph
         # Find the number of nodes in the input graph
         nodes <- nodes(mygraph)
         numnodes <- length(nodes)
         # Record the vertex number for each vertex name
         myvector <- vector()
         for (i in 1:numnodes)
         {
            node <- nodes[i] # "node" is the vertex name, i is the vertex number
            myvector[`node`] <- i  # Add named element to myvector
         }
         # Create a graph in the "igraph" library format, with numnodes nodes:
         newgraph <- graph.empty(n=numnodes,directed=FALSE)
         # First record which edges we have seen already in the "mymatrix" matrix,
         # so that we don't add any edge twice:
         mymatrix <- matrix(nrow=numnodes,ncol=numnodes)
         for (i in 1:numnodes)
         {
            for (j in 1:numnodes)
            {
               mymatrix[i,j] = 0
               mymatrix[j,i] = 0
            }
         }
         # Now add edges to the graph "newgraph":
         for (i in 1:numnodes)
         {
            node <- nodes[i] # "node" is the vertex name, i is the vertex number
            # Find the nodes that this node is joined to:
            neighbours <- adj(mygraph, node)
            neighbours <- neighbours[[1]] # Get the list of neighbours
            numneighbours <- length(neighbours)
            if (numneighbours >= 1) # If this node "node" has some edges to other nodes
            {
               for (j in 1:numneighbours)
               {
                  neighbour <- neighbours[j]
                  # Get the vertex number
                  neighbourindex <- myvector[neighbour]
                  neighbourindex <- neighbourindex[[1]]
                  # Add a node in the new graph "newgraph" between vertices i and neighbourindex
                  # In graph "newgraph", the vertices are counted from 0 upwards.
                  indexi <- i
                  indexj <- neighbourindex
                  # If we have not seen this edge already:
                  if (mymatrix[indexi,indexj] == 0 && mymatrix[indexj,indexi] == 0)
                  {
                     mymatrix[indexi,indexj] <- 1
                     mymatrix[indexj,indexi] <- 1 
                     # Add edges to the graph "newgraph"
                     newgraph <- add.edges(newgraph, c(i, neighbourindex))
                  }
               }   
            }
         }
         # Set the names of the vertices in graph "newgraph":
         newgraph <- set.vertex.attribute(newgraph, "name", value=nodes)
         # Now find communities in the graph:
         communities <- spinglass.community(newgraph)
         # Find how many communities there are:
         sizecommunities <- communities$csize 
         numcommunities <- length(sizecommunities)
         # Find which vertices belong to which communities:
         membership <- communities$membership
         # Get the names of vertices in the graph "newgraph":
         vertexnames <- get.vertex.attribute(newgraph, "name")
         # Print out the vertices belonging to each community:
         for (i in 1:numcommunities)
         {
            cnt <- cnt + 1  
            nummembers <- 0
            printout <- paste("Community",cnt,":") 
            for (j in 1:length(membership))
            {
               community <- membership[j]
               if (community == i) # If vertex j belongs to the ith community
               {
                  vertexname <- vertexnames[j]
                  if (plot == FALSE)
                  {
                     nummembers <- nummembers + 1
                     # Print out the vertices belonging to the community
                     printout <- paste(printout,vertexname)
                  }
                  else
                  {
                     # Colour in the vertices belonging to the community
                     myvector[`vertexname`] <- cnt   
                  }
               }  
             }
             if (plot == FALSE && nummembers >= minsize) 
             { 
                print(printout) 
             } 
          }
          return(list(cnt,myvector))
       }

The function
findcommunities() uses the function spinglass.community() from the
"igraph" package to identify communities in a graph or subgraph. As
its arguments (inputs), the findcommunities() function takes the
graph/subgraph that we want to find communities in, and the minimum
number of vertices that a community must have to be reported.

For example, to find communities within the subgraph corresponding
to the third connected component of the litG graph, we can type:

::

    > mysubgraph <- subGraph(component3, litG)
    > findcommunities(mysubgraph, 1) 
    [1] "Community 1 : YML104C YOR191W YDL030W YDR485C YDL013W"
    [1] "Community 2 : YBR073W YDR146C YLR134W YER179W YIL144W"
    [1] "Community 3 : YOL139C YGR162W YMR117C YDR386W YDL043C YDR180W"
    [1] "Community 4 : YBL084C YLR127C YNL172W YDL008W YDR118W"
    [1] "Community 5 : YAR007C YER095W YJL173C YNL312W YDR004W YML032C YDR076W"
    [1] "Community 6 : YBR009C YBR010W YNL030W YNL031C YMR284W YDL042C YMR106C YDR227W"
    [1] "There were 6 communities in the input graph"

This tells us that there are six different communities in the
subgraph corresponding to the third connected component of the litG
graph.

Note that if you run findcommunities() again and again on the same
input graph, it might find slightly different sets of communities
each time. This is because it uses a random number generator in the
method that it uses for identifying communities, and the random
number used will be different each time you run the
findcommunities() function, which means that you will get slightly
different answers each time. The answers should be very similar,
however, but you might see a small difference, for example, a large
community might be split into two smaller communities.

You can make a plot of the communities in a graph or subgraph by
using the plotcommunities() function:

::

    > plotcommunities <- function(mygraph)
      {
         # Function to plot network communities in a graph
         # Load the "igraph" package:
         require("igraph")
         # Make a plot of the graph
         graphplot <- layoutGraph(mygraph, layoutType="neato")  
         renderGraph(graphplot) 
         # Get the names of the nodes in the graph:        
         vertices <- nodes(mygraph)
         numvertices <- length(vertices)
         # Now record the colour of each vertex in a vector "myvector":
         myvector <- vector()
         colour <- "red"
         for (i in 1:numvertices)
         {
            vertex <- vertices[i]
            myvector[`vertex`] <- colour   # Add named element to myvector
         }
         # Set the counter for the number of communities:
         cnt <- 0
         # First find the connected components in the graph:
         myconnectedcomponents <- connectedComp(mygraph)
         # For each connected component, find the communities within that connected component:
         numconnectedcomponents <- length(myconnectedcomponents)
         for (i in 1:numconnectedcomponents)
         {
            component <- myconnectedcomponents[[i]]
            # Find the number of nodes in this connected component:
            numnodes <- length(component)
            if (numnodes > 1) # We can only find communities if there is more than one node
            {
               mysubgraph <- subGraph(component, mygraph)
               # Find the communities within this connected component:
               mylist <- findcommunities2(mysubgraph,cnt,"TRUE",myvector,0)
               cnt <- mylist[[1]]
               myvector <- mylist[[2]]
            }
          }
          # Get a set of cnt colours, where cnt is equal to the number of communities found:
          mycolours <- rainbow(cnt)
          # Set the colour of the vertices, so that vertices in each community are of the same colour,
          # and vertices in different communities are different colours:
          myvector2 <- vector()
          for (i in 1:numvertices)
          {
             vertex <- vertices[i]
             community <- myvector[vertex]
             mycolour <- mycolours[community] 
             myvector2[`vertex`] <- mycolour
         }
         nodeRenderInfo(graphplot) = list(fill=myvector2)
         renderGraph(graphplot)
     } 

For example, to make a plot of the communities in the third
connected component of the litG graph using the plotcommunities()
function, you need to type:

::

    > mysubgraph <- subGraph(component3, litG)
    > plotcommunities(mysubgraph) 

|image4|

In the graph above, the six communities in the third connected
component of the litG graph are coloured with six different
colours.

Reading in protein-protein interaction data in R
------------------------------------------------

In the above example, you looked at the litG data set of
protein-protein interactions, which is a data set that comes with
the "yeastExpData" R package. But what if you want to look at a
data set of protein-protein interactions that does not come from
R?

It is common to store data on protein-protein interactions in a
text file with two columns, where each line of the file contains a
pair of proteins that interact with each other. For example, such a
file may look like this: YKL166C YIL033C
YCR002C YHR107C
YCR002C YJR076C
YCR002C YLR314C
YJR076C YHR107C
This indicates that there are 5 protein-protein interactions,
between protein YKL166C and protein YIL033C, between YCR002C and
YHR107C, between YCR002C and YJR076C, between YCR002C and YLR314C,
and between YJR076C and YHR107C.

The function makeproteingraph() makes a graph based on an input file of
protein-protein interactions, where the first two columns of the input file
indiciate the pairs of proteins that interact:

::

    > makeproteingraph <- function(myfile)
      {
         # Function to make a graph based on protein-protein interaction data in an input file
         require("graph")
         mytable <- read.table(file(myfile)) # Store the data in a data frame
         proteins1 <- mytable$V1
         proteins2 <- mytable$V2
         protnames <- c(levels(proteins1),levels(proteins2))
         # Find out how many pairs of proteins there are
         numpairs <- length(proteins1)
         # Find the unique protein names:
         uniquenames <-  unique(protnames)
         # Make a graph for these proteins with no edges:
         mygraph <- new("graphNEL", nodes = uniquenames)
         # Add edges to the graph:
         # See http://rss.acs.unt.edu/Rdoc/library/graph/doc/graph.pdf for more examples
         weights <- rep(1,numpairs)
         mygraph2 <- addEdge(as.vector(proteins1),as.vector(proteins2),mygraph,weights)
         return(mygraph2)      
      }

For example, the example file
`http://www.maths.tcd.ie/~avrillee/littlebookofr/ExampleInteractionData <http://www.maths.tcd.ie/~avrillee/littlebookofr/ExampleInteractionData>`_
contains the five pairs of interacting proteins listed above. You
can read it in and make a graph for these interacting proteins by
typing:

::

    > thegraph <- makeproteingraph("http://www.maths.tcd.ie/~avrillee/littlebookofr/ExampleInteractionData")

You can then make a plot of this graph as before:

::

    > mygraphplot <- layoutGraph(thegraph, layoutType="neato")  
    > renderGraph(mygraphplot)

|image5|

Creating random graphs in R
---------------------------

A *random graph* is a graph that is generated by a random process,
where you start off with a certain number of vertices (nodes), and
edges are added by randomly choosing pairs of vertices and making
an edge between the two members of each of those pairs of vertices.
(This is known as the *Erdös-Renyi* model for random graphs). In a
random graph, vertices with lots of connections are equally likely
as vertices with very few connections. That is, if you calculate
the average degree of the vertices in a random graph, you will find
that the degrees of most of the vertices in the graph is near to
the average.

It is often useful and interesting to compare the properties of
biological graphs to random graphs. In order to do this, you need
to be able to generate some random graphs. The function
makerandomgraph() in R makes a random graph with a
certain number of edges:

::

    > makerandomgraph <- function(numvertices,numedges)
      {
         # Function to make a random graph
         require("graph")
         # Make a vector with the names of the vertices
         mynames <- sapply(seq(1,numvertices),toString) 
         myrandomgraph <- randomEGraph(mynames, edges = numedges)
         return(myrandomgraph)
      }

This function takes as its argument (input)
the number of vertices and edges that you want the random graph to
have to have. For example, to create a random graph that has 15
vertices and 43 edges, we type:

::

    > myrandomgraph <- makerandomgraph(15, 43)
    > myrandomgraph # Print out the number of vertices and edges in the graph
    A graphNEL graph with undirected edges
    Number of Nodes = 15 
    Number of Edges = 43  

In the R code above, we tell R to give the vertices the labels 1 to
15. We can of course plot the random graph:

::

    > myrandomgraphplot <- layoutGraph(myrandomgraph, layoutType="neato")  
    > renderGraph(myrandomgraphplot)

|image6|

Summary
-------

In this practical, you will have learnt to use the following R
functions:


#. data() to load a data set that comes with a package into R
#. table() for making a table of the data in a vector, or finding
   out how many elements in a vector have a particular value
#. sort() for sorting a vector

All of these functions belong to the standard installation of R.

You have also learnt the following R functions that belong to the
additional R packages:


#. nodes() from the "graph" package for getting a list of the names
   of vertices in a graph
#. adj() from the "graph" package for getting a list of the
   vertices that a particular vertex is connected to in a graph
#. degree() from the "graph" package for calculating the degree of
   each of the vertices in a graph
#. connectedComp() from the "RBGL" package for identifying
   connected components in a graph
#. subGraph() from the "graph" package for extracting a subgraph
   from a graph
#. layoutGraph() and renderGraph() from the "Rgraphviz" package for
   plotting a graph or subgraph

Links and Further Reading
-------------------------

Some links are included here for further reading. 

For background reading on graphs and protein-protein interaction
graphs, it is recommended to read Chapters 1, 2 and 4 of
*Principles of Computational Cell Biology: from protein complexes to cellular networks*
by Volkhard Helms (Wiley-VCH;
`http://www.wiley-vch.de/publish/en/books/bySubjectLS00/ISBN3-527-31555-1 <http://www.wiley-vch.de/publish/en/books/bySubjectLS00/ISBN3-527-31555-1>`_).

For a more in-depth introduction to R, a good online tutorial is
available on the "Kickstarting R" website,
`cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Lemon-kickstart <http://cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Lemon-kickstart/>`_.

There is also a useful introduction to R in Appendix A ("A Brief
Introduction to R") of the book
*Computational genome analysis: an introduction* by Deonier, Tavaré
and Waterman (Springer).

There is another nice (slightly more in-depth) tutorial to R
available on the "Introduction to R" website,
`cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/R-intro.html <http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/R-intro.html>`_.

For more in-depth information and more examples on using the
"graph" package for analysing graphs, look at the "graph" package
documentation,
`www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/graph/index.html <http://www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/graph/index.html>`_.

More information and examples on using the "RBGL" package is
available in the RBGL documentation at
`www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RBGL/index.html <http://www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RBGL/index.html>`_.

More information and examples on using the "Rgraphviz" package is
available in the Rgraphviz documentation at
`www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/Rgraphviz.html <http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/Rgraphviz.html>`_.

More information and examples on using the "igraph" package is
available in the "igraph" documentation at
`www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/igraph/index.html <http://www.cran.r-project.org/web/packages/igraph/index.html>`_.

There are also very useful chapters on "Using Graphs for
Interactome Data" and "Graph Layout" in the book
*Bioconductor Case Studies* by Florian Hahne, Wolfgang Huber,
Robert Gentleman and Seth Falcon
(`http://www.bioconductor.org/pub/biocases/ <http://www.bioconductor.org/pub/biocases/>`_).

Acknowledgements
----------------

Many of the ideas for the examples and exercises for this practical
were inspired by the book
*Principles of Computational Cell Biology: from protein complexes to cellular networks*
by Volkhard Helms (Wiley-VCH;
`http://www.wiley-vch.de/publish/en/books/bySubjectLS00/ISBN3-527-31555-1 <http://www.wiley-vch.de/publish/en/books/bySubjectLS00/ISBN3-527-31555-1>`_).

Contact
-------

I will be grateful if you will send me (`Avril Coghlan <http://www.sanger.ac.uk/research/projects/parasitegenomics/>`_) corrections or suggestions for improvements to
my email address alc@sanger.ac.uk

License
-------

The content in this book is licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

Exercises
---------

Answer the following questions, using the R package. For each
question, please record your answer, and what you typed into R to
get this answer.

Q1. de Lichtenberg *et al* identified protein-protein complexes in the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* that form during the yeast cell cycle. Their data set of pairs of interacting proteins is available for download at the website `http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/databases/cellcycle/yeast\_complexes/binary\_interaction\_data.txt <http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/databases/cellcycle/yeast_complexes/binary_interaction_data.txt>`_. Read this protein-protein interaction data set into R as a graph. How many vertices (proteins) and edges (protein-protein interactions) are there in the graph? 
    There are about 6600 predicted genes in the *S. cerevisiae* genome.
    Is this the same as the number of vertices in the graph of de
    Lichtenberg *et al*'s data? If not, can you explain why?
    Note: the full paper by de Lichtenberg *et al* is available at
    `http://www.sciencemag.org/content/307/5710/724.abstract <http://www.sciencemag.org/content/307/5710/724.abstract>`_
Q2. What is the minimum, maximum and mean number of interactions for the proteins in the graph of de Lichtenberg *et al*'s data? 
    Can you find an example of a *hub protein*?
    Make a histogram plot of the number of interactions for the
    *S. cerevisiae* proteins in de Lichtenberg *et al*'s data set.
Q3. Make a random graph with the same number of vertices and edges as the graph of de Lichtenberg *et al*'s data. What is the minimum, maximum and mean degree of the vertices for the random graph? 
    Is there a difference in the minimum, maximum and mean degree of
    the vertices for the random graph, when compared to the graph of de
    Lichtenberg *et al*'s data?
    Compare a histogram plot of the degree distribution for the random
    graph to a histogram plot of the degree distribution for
    Lichtenberg *et al*'s data set. What do the differences tell you?
Q4. How many connected components exist in the graph of de Lichtenberg *et al*'s data? 
    How many connected components just contain 2 proteins?
    Make a plot of the largest connected component in the graph of de
    Lichtenberg *et al*'s data.
Q5. What proteins does yeast protein YPR119W interact with, in de Lichtenberg *et al*'s data? 
    Draw a picture of the connected component that yeast protein
    YPR119W belongs to. Can you see YPR119W in the picture?
    Plot the communities in this connected component. Which communities
    does YPR119W belong to?
    What protein complex(es) do you think YPR119W belongs to?
    Can you find anything about the nature of the interactions between
    YPR119W and the proteins that it interacts with? Hint: search for
    YPR119W and the proteins that it interacts with in the
    Saccharomyces Genome Database
    (`www.yeastgenome.org/ <http://www.yeastgenome.org/>`_). It may
    also be useful to look at Figure 3 in de Lichtenberg *et al*'s
    paper
    (`http://www.sciencemag.org/content/307/5710/724.abstract <http://www.sciencemag.org/content/307/5710/724.abstract>`_).
    Can you identify the complex(es) that YPR119W belongs to in Figure
    1 of de Lichtenberg *et al*'s paper?




.. |image0| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image5.png
.. |image1| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image1.png
            :width: 700
.. |image2| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image2.png
.. |image3| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image7.png
.. |image4| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image8.png
.. |image5| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image4.png
.. |image6| image:: ../../_static/MB6300_P1_image6.png
